# Vote for Our Next Papers
## rank from 1 (most want to read) to 6 (least want to read)

### TItles & Abstracts

A. Zaffos, S. Finnegan, S. E. Peters, Plate tectonic regulation of global marine animal diversity. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 114, 5653–5658 (2017).

***Abstract:*** Valentine and Moores [Valentine JW, Moores EM (1970) Nature 228:657–659] hypothesized that plate tectonics regulates global biodiversity by changing the geographic arrangement of conti- nental crust, but the data required to fully test the hypothesis were not available. Here, we use a global database of marine animal fossil occurrences and a paleogeographic reconstruction model to test the hypothesis that temporal patterns of continen- tal fragmentation have impacted global Phanerozoic biodiversity. We find a positive correlation between global marine inverte- brate genus richness and an independently derived quantitative index describing the fragmentation of continental crust during supercontinental coalescence–breakup cycles. The observed posi- tive correlation between global biodiversity and continental frag- mentation is not readily attributable to commonly cited vagaries of the fossil record, including changing quantities of marine rock or time-variable sampling effort. Because many different envi- ronmental and biotic factors may covary with changes in the geographic arrangement of continental crust, it is difficult to iden- tify a specific causal mechanism. However, cross-correlation indi- cates that the state of continental fragmentation at a given time is positively correlated with the state of global biodiversity for tens of millions of years afterward. There is also evidence to sug- gest that continental fragmentation promotes increasing marine richness, but that coalescence alone has only a small negative or stabilizing effect. Together, these results suggest that conti- nental fragmentation, particularly during the Mesozoic breakup of the supercontinent Pangaea, has exerted a first-order con- trol on the long-term trajectory of Phanerozoic marine animal diversity.

---
C. Pimiento et al., The Pliocene marine megafauna extinction and its impact on functional diversity. *Nature Ecol Evol*. 1, 1100–1106 (2017).

***Abstract:*** The end of the Pliocene marked the beginning of a period of great climatic variability and sea-level oscillations. Here, based on a new analysis of the fossil record, we identify a previously unrecognized extinction event among marine megafauna (mammals, seabirds, turtles and sharks) during this time, with extinction rates three times higher than in the rest of the Cenozoic, and with 36% of Pliocene genera failing to survive into the Pleistocene. To gauge the potential consequences of this event for ecosystem functioning, we evaluate its impacts on functional diversity, focusing on the 86% of the megafauna genera that are associated with coastal habitats. Seven (14%) coastal functional entities (unique trait combinations) disappeared, along with 17% of functional richness (volume of the functional space). The origination of new genera during the Pleistocene created new functional entities and contributed to a functional shift of 21%, but minimally compensated for the functional space lost. Reconstructions show that from the late Pliocene onwards, the global area of the neritic zone significantly diminished and exhibited amplified fluctuations. We hypothesize that the abrupt loss of productive coastal habitats, potentially acting alongside oceanographic alterations, was a key extinction driver. The importance of area loss is supported by model analyses showing that animals with high energy requirements (homeotherms) were more susceptible to extinction. The extinction event we uncover here demonstrates that marine megafauna were more vulnerable to global environmental changes in the recent geological past than previously thought. The Pliocene marine megafaunal extinctions caused functional diversity loss, which was not mitigated by newly evolved taxa in the Pleistocene. This paper points towards an abrupt loss of productive coastal habitats as a key extinction driver.

---
C. D. Whalen, D. E. G. Briggs, The Palaeozoic colonization of the water column and the rise of global nekton. *Proc R Soc London Ser B*. 285, 20180883 (2018).

***Abstract:*** The colonization of the water column is among the most important transformations in the evolution of animal life and global ecosystems. The Devonian nekton revolution has been identified as a major macroevolutionary event signifying the rapid occupation of the water column by independent radiations of swimming animals. Using new data, an expanded taxonomic coverage, sample standardization and increased ecological resolution, we analysed patterns of nektonization during the Palaeozoic. We find that nekton and eunekton were well established prior to the Devonian and did not diversify dramatically during any Palaeozoic interval. Relative nektic diversity and occurrences decreased rather than increased during the Devonian. Eunektic diversity and occurrences increased throughout the Palaeozoic, but this rise was protracted and cannot be attributed to any single interval. Our new data indicate that the metazoan colonization of the water column was considerably more complex and gradual than previously understood.

---
E. C. Sibert, P. M. Hull, R. D. Norris, Resilience of Pacific pelagic fish across the Cretaceous/Palaeogene mass extinction. *Nature Geosci*. 7, 667–670 (2014).

***Abstract:*** Open-ocean ecosystems experienced profound disruptions to biodiversity and ecological structure during the Cretaceous/Palaeogene mass extinction about 66 million years ago1–3. It has been suggested that during this mass extinction, a collapse of phytoplankton production rippled up the food chain, causing the wholesale loss of consumers and top predators3–5. Pelagic fish represent a key trophic link between primary producers and top predators, and changes in their abundance provide a means to examine trophic relationships during extinctions. Here we analyse accumulation rates of microscopic fish teeth and shark dermal scales (ichthyoliths) in sediments from the Pacific Ocean and Tethys Sea across the Cretaceous/Palaeogene extinction to reconstruct fish abundance. We find geographic differences in post-disaster ecosystems. In the Tethys Sea, fish abundance fell abruptly at the Cretaceous/Palaeogene boundary and remained depressed for at least 3 million years. In contrast, fish abundance in the Pacific Ocean remained at or above pre-boundary levels for at least four million years following the mass extinction, despite marked extinctions in primary producers and other zooplankton consumers in this region. We suggest that the mass extinction did not produce a uniformly dead ocean or microbially dominated system. Instead, primary production, at least regionally, supported ecosystems with mid-trophic-level abundances similar to or above those of the Late Cretaceous.

---
F. A. Smith, R. E. Elliott Smith, S. K. Lyons, J. L. Payne, Body size downgrading of mammals over the late Quaternary. *Science*. 360, 310 (2018).

***Abstract:*** Today, it is well known that human activities put larger animals at greater risk of extinction. Such targeting of the largest species is not new, however. Smith et al. show that biased loss of large-bodied mammal species from ecosystems is a signature of human impacts that has been following hominin migrations since the Pleistocene. If the current trend continues, terrestrial mammal body sizes will become smaller than they have been over the past 45 million years. Megafaunal mammals have a major impact on the structure of ecosystems, so their loss could be particularly damaging.Science, this issue p. 310Since the late Pleistocene, large-bodied mammals have been extirpated from much of Earth. Although all habitable continents once harbored giant mammals, the few remaining species are largely confined to Africa. This decline is coincident with the global expansion of hominins over the late Quaternary. Here, we quantify mammalian extinction selectivity, continental body size distributions, and taxonomic diversity over five time periods spanning the past 125,000 years and stretching approximately 200 years into the future. We demonstrate that size-selective extinction was already under way in the oldest interval and occurred on all continents, within all trophic modes, and across all time intervals. Moreover, the degree of selectivity was unprecedented in 65 million years of mammalian evolution. The distinctive selectivity signature implicates hominin activity as a primary driver of taxonomic losses and ecosystem homogenization. Because megafauna have a disproportionate influence on ecosystem structure and function, past and present body size downgrading is reshaping Earth’s biosphere.

---
S. J. Lane et al., Upper limits to body size imposed by respiratory–structural trade-offs in Antarctic pycnogonids. *Proc R Soc London Ser B*. 284, 20171779 (2017).

***Abstract:*** Across metazoa, surfaces for respiratory gas exchange are diverse, and the size of those surfaces scales with body size. In vertebrates with lungs and gills, surface area and thickness of the respiratory barrier set upper limits to rates of metabolism. Conversely, some organisms and life stages rely on cutaneous respiration, where the respiratory surface (skin, cuticle, eggshell) serves two primary functions: gas exchange and structural support. The surface must be thin and porous enough to transport gases but strong enough to withstand external forces. Here, we measured the scaling of surface area and cuticle thickness in Antarctic pycnogonids, a group that relies on cutaneous respiration. Surface area and cuticle thickness scaled isometrically, which may reflect the dual roles of cuticle in gas exchange and structural support. Unlike in vertebrates, the combined scaling of these variables did not match the scaling of metabolism. To resolve this mismatch, larger pycnogonids maintain steeper oxygen gradients and higher effective diffusion coefficients of oxygen in the cuticle. Interactions among scaling components lead to hard upper limits in body size, which pycnogonids could evade only with some other evolutionary innovation in how they exchange gases.

---
# VOTE
## Rank from 1 to 6 (highest to lowest preference)

______ A. Zaffos, S. Finnegan, S. E. Peters, Plate tectonic regulation of global marine animal diversity. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 114, 5653–5658 (2017).

______ C. Pimiento et al., The Pliocene marine megafauna extinction and its impact on functional diversity. *Nature Ecol Evol*. 1, 1100–1106 (2017).

______ C. D. Whalen, D. E. G. Briggs, The Palaeozoic colonization of the water column and the rise of global nekton. *Proc R Soc London Ser B*. 285, 20180883 (2018).

______ E. C. Sibert, P. M. Hull, R. D. Norris, Resilience of Pacific pelagic fish across the Cretaceous/Palaeogene mass extinction. *Nature Geosci*. 7, 667–670 (2014).

______ F. A. Smith, R. E. Elliott Smith, S. K. Lyons, J. L. Payne, Body size downgrading of mammals over the late Quaternary. *Science*. 360, 310 (2018).

______ S. J. Lane et al., Upper limits to body size imposed by respiratory–structural trade-offs in Antarctic pycnogonids. *Proc R Soc London Ser B*. 284, 20171779 (2017).

